---
title: Revamped Website
permalink: revamped-website
tags: [ general ]
date: 17 Oct, 2015
description: Decided to revamp my personal website. Here's a description of the process
published: true
---

I've been stuck with my horrible website for some time without putting much attention to it, both in terms of content and styling & functionality. That sucks!

For some time i've been coding only low level stuff, like an [IRC server], a [scheduler]() and [memory management]() simulators, all in C. So, no time for web development, which i love so much! That originated my will to remake and revive my personal website using trending tech regarding web development (by this time i suppose React came to your mind - if that happened, you're right!).

### To the tech parts

I've been involved with React for some time in the past and really felt in love w/ by that time.

(more ... )


### The Website and the Blog

Even though the website is completly static (letting me host it on github pages and possibly use the CNAME 'trick' to put it under my own hostname in the future), it can be subdivided in two categories: the 'even more static' that won't be modified with high frequency (`about me`, `talks` and `projects`), and the other, 'less static' that contains blog posts, which i'll maybe change in a weekly basis (this sounds like a promise but ... *you know* ...).

As changing the source code directly seems like a bad idea (and who'd like to create a blog post in a `.js` file w/ react markup?) i created a folder (`assets/content`) which contains the blog posts and a `meta.json` file that describes what's essential about the blog posts.

```json
{
  "metas": [
    {
      "filename": "assets/content/example-1.md",
      "permalink": "example-1",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Example 1",
        "permalink": "example-1",
        "tags": [
          "hello",
          "world"
        ],
        "date": "YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS +/-TTTT",
        "description": "Little description here",
        "published": true
      }
    },
  ]
}
```

This is generated by running a script that is responsible for parsing the markdown file of each blog post, extracting the yaml front-matter (just like jekyll) and then aggregating that info in the `meta.json` file. For running such script i use `npm run` command (see [Kate Hudson - Advanced front-end automation with npm scripts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RYETb9YVrk))

```
...
  "scripts": {
     ...
    "build:scripts": "webpack --config ./webpack/scripts.config.js",
    "build:metadata": "npm run build:scripts && node ./assets/build/metaGenerator.js",
    ...
  },
...
```


### Server Rendering

One of the great benefits of React is the fact that it's simple to have server-rendering set up. With redux such task gets even more intuitive. Whenever a request comes `redux` prepares the state for the application, pass it as props and then `react` does the job of rendering. So, we have a static blog. What we do? Before deploying, prepare every possible (and valid) URL and dispatch to redux and react. Save the result in the appropriate directory and github will do the job of serving it.


